Field Day Log Program Manual

Last updated 03Dec2023 by Scott Hibbs KD4SIR
If you have any questions or suggestions for the program please email me. 

Thanks for using the program,
Scott Hibbs KD4SIR
scotthibbs at gmail.com 

In a Nutshell:
    A participant is everyone. 
	The Contestant is the one making contacts.
	The Logger is the one entering data.
	One of them needs to have a license.
	If you see red, select something.
	Bands are vertical. Modes are horizontal.
	The modes are (C)ode, (D)igital, and (P)hone.
	-Call-Class-Sect- is separated by spaces.
	An example is kd4sir 1d ky <Enter>
	Don't hit enter until after the contact is made.
	Without "QSL - May I have another?" it didn't work.
	Hit <Escape> to start over.
	You can use the up arrow to retype the last contact.
	You can now copy/past full entries.
	Type ? for help.


COMMAND-LINE OPTIONS:

	You can run FDLog_Enhanced with command-line arguments to skip the
	interactive prompts. This is useful for scripting and automation.

	Usage: python FDLog_Enhanced.py [--node NAME] [--auth KEY]

	Options:
	  --node, -n    Station node name (7 chars, e.g., station1, station2, gota)
	  --auth, -a    Authentication key (e.g., 24 for year 2024, or tst for testing)
	  --help, -h    Show help message

	Examples:
	  python FDLog_Enhanced.py                        # Interactive mode
	  python FDLog_Enhanced.py --node station1 --auth 24   # CLI mode
	  python FDLog_Enhanced.py -n gota -a 24          # GOTA station (short form)

	Notes:
	- All nodes must use the same --auth key to communicate on the network
	- Node names are padded to 8 characters with random letters for uniqueness
	- If options are not provided, you will be prompted interactively 


SHORT HISTORY AND INTRODUCTION: 

	This program is 40+ years old!! 

	Alan K Biocca W6AKB (Formerly WB6ZQZ) Wrote this in 1984 using small c 
	and it was titled "WB6ZQZ's Field Day Logging Program". In 2002, Mr Biocca 
	rewrote the program in Python and renamed it FDLog. That year, FDLog was 
	released as open source with the GNU License. FDLog is still in use by the High Sierra 
	Field Day Group and maintained by Mr Biocca at www.fdlog.info. 

	My name is Scott Hibbs KD4SIR. I found FDLog on the Internet and started using it
	for Field Day 2012. After using FDLog for Field Day 2013, the South Central Indiana 
	Communications Support Group (SCICSG - we pronounce it scuzzy) wanted to know their 
	individual scores and wanted a better way to see who was on what bands. When our 
	upgrades were not acted on, we decided to modify the program for ourselves for 2014. 
	It was eventually renamed FDLog_Enhanced and made a repository on www.github.com. 
	We have enhanced the original program and occasionally will pick up some of Mr Biocca's 
	new ideas too.  

	We hope you fall in love with the program (like we have) and can help us improve it. 

	
WHY LOVE FDLOG_ENHANCED?: 

	Simply, "It is a free networked logging program with a distributed database." If you 
	need more let me explain. Since it is networked, everyone can see the band and mode you 
	are on. Since the data is distributed, your contacts get sent to all the other users 
	in real time. No one can dupe and non-dupe contacts are displayed as you log. You can 
	send messages to all users. You can see how many contacts you have made, how many contacts
	you have logged and see the combined phone and digital and CW contacts for the group. It tracks 
	who is the control operator (logger) for non-hams (as Contestant). The GOTA station log is 
	maintained WITH the regular log without conflicting with dupes. It is simple to use. Really.

	The greatest thing is how it is not dependant on one computer! A computer can go down, bad
	crash - like Zed is dead baby - and Field Day goes on. Add a new computer to 
	the network and all the other computers will catch the new one up very quickly. 

	Because it is Python 3, all you need is a PC - Linux, Mac, any Windoze, RaspberryPi - 
	we don't care - doesn't matter. 
	
	If I didn't HAVE you when I said, "free", "Zed is dead", and "I really don't care what 
	kind you have", maybe this program isn't for you. :)

	
PROGRAM SETUP:

	So you are the ham and or computer guru in charge of logging Field Day.. 
	Here's all you have to do. 

	Before Field Day:
	
	Find a router to bring to field day. I set the SSID to "Field Day" and
	leave it open without a password. This will be what everyone will connect
	to on field day. Test it to make sure it works. And don't leave it home. 
	I've had to buy cheap routers the morning of - I got a collection. 
	
	INTERNET:
	Internet is prefered onsite for NTP servers and building the executables. 
	The program works without the internet available, but the INTERNET IS REQUIRED 
	TO BUILD THE EXECUTABLES FOR EACH TYPE (PC, MAC AND LINUX). 
	If you don't have internet at your site, then you need these executables made before
	going onsite. You will also need a copy of python 3 from python.org for windows, Mac, & Linux. 
	Python because someone will not have python installed and you may be offline.
	
	With a USB flash drive:
		You will need the program folder with the pre-built executables, and the python
		3 install files on a on a flash drive. Move the files to the new machine to install. 
	Without a USB flash drive:
		When you start the first machine on field day, the last set up question will ask
		if you want to distribute the program. Say yes and it creates a zip file and 
		starts share_fdlog.py (can be ran separately). Check that this zip file has any 
		needed premade executables if needed. Go to the other machines on the network, 
		browse to the webpage, download the zip and extract and build/run.  

	The setup questions should be answered by one person and answered once, the rest will say no. 
	So the logging captain will do this. 
	
	But when the program starts it will ask everyone what is the name of the node it is running. 
	I suggest the name of the station or location or antenna - Something everyone will recognize
	where this node will be. This entry requires 7 digits, so letters will be added or removed 
	to make this 7 digits. Everyone must use the same "auth" code which should be the last two 
	digits of the contest year like 27. Next it will ask if you need to set up for Field Day. 
	If you are not the logging captain, say no.  
	Before any contacts are made, the logging captain can change the class and section if 
	needed. 
	
	It is a good habit to check the time efore starting the program, because this program 
	can not change the computer's clock. Time is important to this program because the database
	is shared. 

	At Field Day:
	
	Set up the new router because you left yours at home. Also note many
	public "guest" router networks will not allow computers to talk to each other. 
	Although not necessary, it is recommended to start the computer you want to be a 
	designated Time Master first, set the time, Connect to the router network if wireless 
	(you could also be wired). Start the program alone on the network. If you want this 
	computer to be the designated time master use ".tmast me" or go to properties/Time Function
	and check This node is Time Master. If you need to change the class or other information 
	you added earlier, this can be done with the .set commands found in the help menu. 

	Next you want a copy of the program on every computer. Using the methods above.
	Before starting the program, set the time on the computer with your accurate time 
	source within a second or two. If you forget this step, the program will spend time 
	adjusting it's time to the others. Start the program and set the name and year's digits. 
	Answer NO to the setup question. If connected to the network, it should see 
	your time master pc and grab all it's information. Rinse and Repeat for the others. 
	
	The port that the program uses is listed in the program's heading at the top, this 
	port number does change from year to year. Make sure to allow the port it uses 
	through the firewall on each machine if there is an issue.

	Before field day ends, make sure your computer is the last to be turned off. 
	This is so you have the most accurate log entries in case someone is editing 
	their log after the contest. 
	
	After Field Day:
	
	Look through the .set menu to set any missing information. Don't forget to
	use .pr to make a "fdlog.txt" file that summarizes the contacts etc. 
	Using the program's info, you can submit your results. You're a hero and 
	everyone loves ya. At the recap meeting give everyone funny certificates 
	such as most contacts, least contacts, most points, prettiest radio, 
	and the most important one - most logged which means they helped others.
	This person should be your best friend. Ask them for ideas for me. 


USING THE PROGRAM:	
	
	Participants are everyone at Field Day. The Contestant is the person using 
	the radio. The Logger is the one using the program. The Operator field caused 
	my club to debate if the person was Control Operator. We made a version that 
	required a license for the operator. The problem then, was that a ham & non-ham 
	pair had no idea who operated the radio or logged since it could only be entered 
	one way. The ham got credit for contacts while logging and the non-ham had no 
	idea about the number they logged or contacted (added together). So the Radio 
	Operator and Control Operator are different and confusing for this program. We 
	changed the Operator name to Contestant.
	
	Non-hams are allowed and encouraged to operate with a Control Operator logging.
	This program has always tracked the logger. So the Operator field is renamed 
	Contestant for the person at the radio. Thus, we can track the number of contacts 
	or data entries logged, and keep accurate logs for everyone, even for non-hams. 
	Hams can accurately know how many contacts they worked and who logged for them. 
	They can also see if they logged themselves and who they logged for in turn. 
	This maintains a score for contacts and a score for logging for each participant. 
	The program will check for a Control Operator (license needed for Contestant or 
	logger) before allowing a contact. - Scott Hibbs KD4SIR Mar/29/2017
	
	
LOGGING LIKE A PRO: 

	If you are seeing red, you need to select something before trying to log 
	an entry. You need to select the Contestant, the Logger, the power (natural
	does not mean a gas generator), and which band and mode you will be using. 

	Entry has been straight forward since 1984. That's before pretty pictures.
	Enter the call and hit <space>. If this is a dupe it will show all the entries
	for that call and be erased. If the call has been worked on a different band 
	those will populate and the call will remain for more entry. Next enter the 
	Class and the Section. Once confirmed hit enter to add this entry to the log. 
	
	If you're feeling fancy: You can also just enter the suffix and hit space.
	It will show you those who might have been worked with that suffix on this
	band. If correct continue with the Class and Section. If incorrect type the
	correct prefix and hit space. Then continue with the call and Section. Hit
	Enter to add the call to the log.
	
	Many times the logging program will think you are getting fancy and try to be
	fancy itself. If either of you are confused, just hit Escape to clear the 
	entry and start over - try not to get too fancy. 
	
	The up arrow will recall an entry previously typed before. 
	
	Complete contacts like "kd4sir 1d IN" can be now copy or pasted into the entry window.
	
	Unless you see "QSL! May I have another!" it didn't log. 
	

COMMANDS: 

	Adding Participants:
	
	Each participant has to have a unique set of initials. Once set these initials can
	not change. The Logging Captain has admin privileges and can edit a name, call, 
    age, or title but not the initials. A participant can not be deleted if they have
	calls in the log. 
	
	The age and visitor title are used to track official visitors and any youth 
	participants that may attend. The program doesn't automatically count these yet
	in it's summary. But one day it will.

	Editing:
	
	Simply click on the entry you want to edit. In the log window the entries made 
	by this node will be dark blue while others are black. You can only edit your 
	own blue entries.  
	
	Adding Entries from a paper log:
	
	Set the operator, logger, power and band/mode then type the entry with this format. 
	:dd.hhmm <call> <report>
	
	Commands:
	
	#<message> will send a message (QST) to all the other users. 
	.st     this station's status
	.ba     station and band status
	.re     log summary report
	.pr     print contest entry to file
	.band	<space>40p<enter> will change your band to 40p. 
	.off 	Will change your band to off.
	.pow 	<space>ddddn<enter> will change your power. (ddddn could equal 100 or 1500n)
	.testq	<space><number> Will create fake number of entries in tst mode only.

	
	The .set Commands are listed in the help menu. They should be used by the person 
	setting up the program. 


TROUBLESHOOTING:

	  A new label for FDLog_Enhanced is the Network section. This label will now 
	describe your current network status with different colors. Grey shows if everything
	is OK, Yellow will ask you if there is a problem, and Red displays if there IS a problem. 
	The messages in FDLog_Enhanced have been renamed to be more descriptive but the issues below
	are the same. 
	
	Most network errors occur due to firewall issues. Please ensure the firewall isn't blocking traffic.

				 
	  SEND FAIL  or SNDP FAIL. The error displayed in FDLog_Enhanced is 
				 "SEND FAIL - Not sending data to others. (firewall?)"
				 The Packet Sender has received an error from the operating
				 system. This may occur when there is a network problem. Check the 
				 firewall. Restarting the program or rebooting may cure it. 
				 
	  RCVP FAIL  In FDLog_Enhanced this is called 
				"Alone? Not receiving data from others. (firewall?)" Ten seconds have 
				 passed without receiving any packets. This indicates that no 
				 other packets from a FDLOG program are being received within 
				 the time window. This could indicate a problem with the network 
				 or auth key, or it could be normal if this is the only computer 
				 on this network running the program. Try restarting the program 
				 after the network is known to be working.
				 
				 * This will also flash occasionally under normal circumstances 
				 if there are only two computers on the network or if there
				 is inactivity on the network in the programs.   
				 

	  AUTH FAIL  A packet has been received (on the port) that has the incorrect
				 authentication code. It will not be processed. All nodes
				 participating must use the same authentication key. This is the 
				 two digit number entered when starting the program refering to
				 the year of the contest ("23").
				 
				 Refer to the command window for more information about this error. It
				 is best if test and production modes use different ports to
				 avoid seeing each others packets which have differing
				 authentication codes.

	  NEED FILL  A node status broadcast has been received, and one or more
				 of these nodes have data that this node's database does
				 not have. This node will request the missing data until
				 it is caught up. The new database items will be displayed in
				 the upper display as they come in. If the NEED FILL is
				 indicated, and no data is flowing into the upper display,
				 the requests for data are not being answered.

	How the program handles the Time:
	● Time Sync Overview

  Priority Chain (highest to lowest)
  ┌──────────┬────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────┐
  │ Priority │       Source       │              How Set              │             Behavior              │
  ├──────────┼────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 1        │ tmast (designated) │ User sets via .tmast me or dialog │ Always wins if online             │
  ├──────────┼────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 2        │ telect (elected)   │ Judge announces after election    │ Acts as master when tmast offline │
  ├──────────┼────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 3        │ Client             │ Automatic                         │ Syncs from level 0 source         │
  └──────────┴────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────┘
  Time Levels

  - Level 0 - Time master (designated, elected, or NTP-synced)
  - Level 1-8 - Synced from a level N-1 source
  - Level 9 - Unsynchronized

  Election System

  Judge: Lowest named active node

  Election Triggers:
  - tmast set but offline, no valid telect
  - telect set but offline (and tmast still offline)
  - No tmast, no telect, no time source for 90+ seconds

  Election Process:
  1. Judge sets telect = "election" (broadcast)
  2. 10 second collection period
  3. Judge evaluates: GPS > NTP > lowest node name
  4. Judge sets telect = <winner> (broadcast)

  Winner Priority: GPS-locked → NTP-synced → Lowest node name

  Broadcast & Sync

  - Nodes broadcast status every 10 seconds (includes time level)
  - Clock update runs every 30 seconds
  - Nodes receive time via calib() and adjust via _do_client_sync()
  - Active node timeout: 60 seconds (considered offline after)

  State Transitions

  [No Master] --90s--> [Judge starts election] --10s--> [telect winner]
                                                              |
  [tmast returns] <------------ [telect defers] <-------------+
        |
        v
  [tmast leaves] --> [telect resumes automatically]
        |
  [telect also leaves] --> [New election by remaining judge]

  Key Commands
  ┌───────────────┬────────────────────────────────────┐
  │    Command    │               Action               │
  ├───────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ .tmast        │ Show full status                   │
  ├───────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ .tmast me     │ Set this node as designated master │
  ├───────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ .tmast <node> │ Set specific node as designated    │
  ├───────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ .tmast clear  │ Clear tmast and telect             │
  ├───────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ .tmast elect  │ Force new election                 │
  └───────────────┴────────────────────────────────────┘
  Persistence

  - tmast - Persists in log, survives restarts, never auto-cleared
  - telect - Persists in log, cleared only by new election or .tmast clear
 
	
If you have any questions or suggestions for the program please email me. 

Thanks for using the program,
Scott Hibbs KD4SIR
scotthibbs at gmail.com 

EOF