Field Day Log Program Manual

is distributed under the GNU Public License

fdlogman.txt: Revision: 1.18

2011 updates

.set contst FD or VHF changes dup check to include <call>/<grid> for VHF contest

New for 2006

QSO Editing! Right-clicking on a Q in the log brings up an edit
dialog box. From there it can be Deleted, or modified and then
Saved. Errors light up the fields in yellow when Save is attempted.
The Dialog disappears on Successful Save, Delete, or Quit.

Log text from the local node is blue in color, from other nodes is black.
Automatic case adjustment for various inputs simplifies usage. Automatic
log lookups show log entries for duplicate stations and stations being
logged show info from other bands. Log lookups (<callsign><return>)
conveniently allow looking stations up in the log.

Directly Executable Version distributed. fdlogexe.zip. Runs without Python
installed. Windows required. 3.5 Megabyte download.


New for 2005

Time Synchronization. Designate one machine as the master, all others will
chase it. Use '.set tmast <node>' to select master time node.

Changed fd rules filename to 'fdrules.pdf'. Just download pdf rules and
rename the file to this name. Then the rules can be accessed from the menu.

Found and fixed another bug in the power type-in. Using the pulldown worked,
but typing in caused problems. Root cause here is changes to how Python
handles variable types.

Made an attempt to fix up the GOTA scoring changes in the ARRL rules. Not
tested.

Added the second site visitor as well as the youth bonus.

New for 2004

Just before Field Day many minor changes were made to the startup. The
messages were improved and things were simplified in general. Also added
is a directly executable version that does not require Python to be installed.
This version carries an interpreter along with it, so it is larger.
The startup auth key is xxxyyyzzz... xxx goes onto filename. Use 04a for
2004 version a. yyy for port, zzz... for hash key.

Just after Field Day the Time Sync feature was added (enough problems with
NTP servers and clients...). Now a node may be designated as the 'time master'
and all client FDLog programs will track it. This DOES NOT change the system
time, just the internal time FDLog uses in the log...


Short History

This new version of the FD Log program was written in March-April of 2002. It was
written first for command line mode, and then altered for Windows Event type
programming. It retains many of the line oriented commands, indeed the basic entry
of QSO information is most efficient in this manner. Some of the command line
commands are or will be deprecated as they are not consistent with the new mode.


Program Requirements

Efficient keystroke input for QSO entry was the fundamental requirement of the 
original program written in 1984. This remains a priority requirement today. 
This means that no mouse activity is required for data entry during QSO logging.
It is not necessary to use the mouse to change bands or power 
settings. These frequent items are available both in command
and mouse/dialog box form.

The new requirement, and indeed one of the strong motivations for a complete
rewrite, is multi-station synchronization. The activity of Field Day operations
is strongly dependent on sharing of information between stations - keeping the
logs for each band and mode, and keeping track of which stations are on what
bands, and how many are active. Running around the site looking for a band-mode
floppy or transmitter token is not conducive to efficient operation. So this
version is required to facilitate those activites.

Robustness, as always, is a major requirement. This software operates in an
environment of unreliable computers, power systems, and RF. Single points of
failure must either be avoided or a failure mitigation strategy must be in place
that minimizes the impacts of failures on the operation.


Program Design

The first attempt at a redesign of this software occurred in about 2000 and
was based on PHP and MySQL. There were two problems with that approach. One
was the huge single point of failure in that model, and the other was the 
efficiency of the system with regard to operator keystrokes and response time.

This second attempt was facilitated by the availability of two things. One
is the peer to peer wireless networking, 802.11b. The other is a relatively
new programming language that supports multiplatform rapid prototyping and 
has the requisite socket libraries. I have experimented with many languages,
but none have had the clean syntax and wide ranging capabilities that Python
comes with. One purpose of using Python here is to write a nontrivial program
in the language and see how the process and product progress. Thus far I am
not disappointed. Progress has been rapid, with about a month of elapsed time,
and less than a hundred hours to produce a nearly complete product, including
the traversal of many learning curves.

The program centers on several in-memory databases using Python dictionaries.
These keep track of the log data and the by-suffix listings that are used to
quickly find duplicates. A disk backup of the data is kept updated by appending
new entries as they arrive.

The user interface centers on a contact data parser
that carefully analyzes the input as it is typed, keystroke by keystroke. This
prevents typing far beyond syntax errors and gives rapid user feedback.

The network sharing of data depends on three UDP message types. The periodic
broadcast from each station contains a list of that station's database
contents. By listening to broadcasts, each station can determine which
stations have database entries they are missing, and request them. The request
is the second message type. The third message type is the contact information,
and it is transmitted in response to a request. Additionally, a broadcast
transmission of new data occurs when that data is generated, so that stations
only need to request fills when they miss the original data broadcast.

The effect of all this is that each station has a complete copy of all data,
and loss of a station has little effect on the system. Also, a new station
can be added at any time. This can be done in two different ways. One is to
copy a starter database from any station (file fdlog.fdd) and place it in
the program directory before starting it. Alternately, starting the program
with no database file will also work, but in this case it will take a bit
longer to catch up. It should load 5 to 10 entries per second. Obviously
starting with a partial database can speed things up considerably.


Wireless Networking

There is a separate note on Wireless setup, refer to that for details. There
are basically two modes for wireless as I understand it, one is Access point
and the other is peer-to-peer, also referred to as ad-hoc. In the access point
style of operation, all packets flow through the access point which is a
gateway onto the rest of the internet. This is a great model for work or
home. Out in the woods it also works, and is similar to repeater operation.
It has the effect of dropping the bandwidth in half since it is a store and
forward type repeater. In peer-to-peer operation, stations communicate
directly in a simplex mode type operation.

If all stations can hear each other, the peer-to-peer operation should produce
better performance, and avoids the single point of failure in the access
point. If stations cannot all hear each other the software will still work,
since the data will propagate partially from the initial broadcast and from
there by fills. At some point the access point repeater type operation becomes
more efficient if all stations can hear a single repeater.

NOTE - Any standard networking will work, wireless is not required. Some
folks prefer wired nets. The stations need to be within broadcast range
of each other (at this time). The feature to span across networks is only
partially implemented.


Time Synchronization

It is nice to have synchronous time in the database records. It is used to sort 
log reports and determine the time window for 
accepting contact data for the contest. FDLog will internally keep the clients
fairly well synchronized if a master time node is specified.


GUI Version

The Graphical version of the software was started just after Beta-2 was released. 
It came up quickly, but required significant effort to get it looking decent. Some
important features were added and a few bugs in the old version were found and 
fixed. Beta-3 is the first GUI release. It runs (more or less) on all three 
platforms: Win32, MacOS, and Unix/Linux.


  The text that follows concentrates on command techniques. The GUI menus and
buttons are also available, explore them.

  When you need to quit the program use File/Exit or the Window Exit button to exit
properly. If it crashes it will not release the band. Start it again to release the 
band you had reserved.

  Timers have been added to the program. After a minute or so without hearing a
station it will cancel the band reservation.

  Set the output power (in watts) used by the station with the buttons on the GUI. 
Check the Natural box if applicable. This allows counting the natural power Qs for 
bonus points. (This is also referred to as alternate power).

  Set the Operator and Logger with the buttons on the GUI.

  Set the authentication code when asked during startup. The keys must match for the 
net to share data.

  The power, operator, logger, and authentication data are stored in a file with
the log program on normal exit, and reloaded on restart to minimize re-entering.
The band is not restored, so it will have to be re-selected after restarting the
program.

  Band is set with band select pushbuttons, or the command ".band <band>". Bands 
are 160/80/40/20/15/10/6/2 meters, or
220/440/1200 mhz or sat followed by a letter c, d or p for cw, digital or phone. 
It will warn you if there is another station on that band, but it will allow the
change anyway. Make sure the other station is not using the same band before making
contacts.

  Testing is best done with the band set to 'off'. This is the startup default.
Contacts made to band 'off' are not counted in the various scoring outputs, and
can be filtered from the log. 

  Logging contacts is designed for maximum efficiency of keystrokes. Enter the 
suffix followed by a space to do a quick dup callsign check. This will list any 
calls on this band/mode that have that suffix. You could type the whole call and a 
space, but the suffix lookup is quicker for most typists. To log that call enter 
the prefix and a space, and it will automatically pick up the earlier suffix and 
be ready for the report. After typing the report, wait for the actual QSL before 
hitting return. Return logs the Q into the database, and sends it to all the
cooperating databases.

  Here is an example using 12 keystrokes to log a Q:

  aw<space> ==> ['w2aw']         <shows w2aw was worked on this band>
  w1<space> ==> w1aw<space>_     <waiting for report>
  <report>  ==> w1aw 2a nc_      <waiting for return to log the Q>
  <return>  ==> w1aw 2a nc QSL   <entered into db>

  ESCape will cancel an entry in progress and clear the input line.

  You can look up log info on a callsign with <call><return>. This will show
log info for all bands/modes for this call.

  An incorrectly entered Q can be deleted with the ".delete <station> 
<sequence> <reason>" command. This command actually places a 'delete' 
entry in the log which is used to filter clean logs. The reason is required. The
sequence number and station are on the right hand side of the logs. If there is
any problem with the syntax it will report 'illegal command'.

  When taking a break in operations, set the band to 'off' with the ".off" command
or GUI button. This makes the band available to others.

  If a station is just joining the net, or was off for awhile, it will take time
for it to 'catch up' to the full database. It attempts to do this at 10 contacts 
per second, so it should not take long. It will display the data as it comes in,
and a needs fill yellow indicator.

Platform Issues

  This program was developed under Windows 2k. It should mostly work on Linux,
Unix, and Macintosh due to the portability of Python and Tkinter. There are
some issues that will affect portability, and some functions may not work.
For example, launching the ARRL Rules pdf file may only work on Win32.

GUI Color Code

  The GUI version has some color coding. In the band select area we have Gray
for available bands,Yellow for occupied bands, Orange for an over-occupied band,
White for the band your station is on, and Red for an over-occupied band you are on.
In the Class column White indicates no stations, Yellow is some but not all we are
allotted, and Green is full usage of that station type. Red or Orange indicates too
many stations for our Class.

Note that the 'target' for vhf is the number of 'free' stations, stations beyond
the target value count toward the Class numbers.

  In the log window the entries made by this node will be dark blue. Others are
black.


Reports (to Command window)

.st     this station's status
.ba     station and band status
.re     log summary report
.pr     print contest entry to file


Time Difference Window

  The .tdwin <secs> parameter sets the number of seconds of error 'allowed' on incoming
packets. Time errors greater than this window will trigger printing of some packet
info in the Command window. The packets are processed normally, so triggering this
print is a warning only.


Input Syntax

call is
  <prefix><suffix><tag>

prefix is
  <letters><digits> or <digits><letters>

suffix is
  <letters or digits>  (different from end of prefix)

tag is
  /<letters or digits>

qso is
  <call> <report>

report is
  <letters or digits or spaces>

dot commands are
  .help				   show .commands
  .op <letters/digits>		   set operator (deprecated)
  .log <letters/digits>		   set logger (deprecated)
  .pow <digits[n]>		   set power level, trailing n iff natural
  .band <bandmode>		   set band and mode
  .node <letters/digits/->         set station/node name
  .authkey <letters/digits>        set communications authentication key (deprecated)
  .tdwin <secs>                    incoming packet warning time window
  .set <param> <value>		   set global parameter (see Help Menu)
  .st                              this station status
  .ba                              station band report
  .re                              contest report
  .pr                              generate contest entry file
  .delete <node-id> <seq> <reason> delete log entry



Send a Broadcast to all stations:
  #<message up to 34 chars>


Deleting items (creating delete entry in database)

  .delete <node-id> <seqnum> <reason>	delete log entry

  Note that the node-id and sequence number come from the right two columns
  of the log displays and that a reason is required.



Forcing a Contact into the database at a specific time (eg: from paper logs)

  First set band, mode, operator, logger and power as the Qs will pick this up.
  Then for each QSO type it in the following format:

  :dd.hhmm <call> <report>


  Time and date should be in UTC, two digit day of month, two digit hours and minutes.



Preparing for the contest

  put a propagation report in 'propagation.txt'
  copy field day rules (from ARRL) into fdrules.pdf
  test everything using 'tst' authentication key

  choose authentication key for operations (yy or yyzzzz)
  change to contest key at start of contest (restart apps)
  set time master node (.set tmast <node>)
  set field day call (.set fdcall <call>)
  set GOTA call (.set gcall <call>)
  set GOTA node id to 'gota' (for the GOTA station computer only)
  set class (.set class XX)
  set section (.set sect XX-XXXXX XXXXX) (abbrev and full spelling)


Computer Preparation

  configure the network - see wireless net document
  set time clock accurately - to within a couple of seconds
  set computer timezone correctly
  turn off screen saver
  adjust auto-turnoff/hibernate/shutdown to avoid surprises
  allow this program through or turn firewall off
  if using a shortcut set the default directory to where the prog dir is
  

Preparing the report for submission after the contest

  set fdstrt   (optional, this clips off qso's that are earlier)
  set fdend    (optional, this clips of qso's that are later)
  set submission from call (see set commands help in program)
  set from name
  set from address ..
  set power sources
  set visitors
  set info booth
  set demo stations
  look through set commands, set as appropriate


  put message texts into files
    w1aw_msg.txt                                       copied w1aw message
    nts_msg.txt                                        originated NTS message
    nts_rly0.txt to nts_rly9.txt (one msg per file)    first 10 relayed NTS messages
    soapbox.txt                                        soapbox comments
    media.txt                                          media text

    note sample nts msg text in nts_eg.txt

  
  generate the report (file/save entry file)

  inspect the report, iterate as needed (fdlog.log)

  copy off the top section for submission to ARRL
  keep the whole file for your records


Alan K Biocca  WB6ZQZ@ARRL.net

eof